SOURCE: State of the Practice and Art for Structural Health Monitoring of Bridge Substructures
Publication No. FHWA-HRT-09-040, U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration, Turner-Fairbank Highway Research Center. Report date: May 2014.
Authors: J. Collins, G. Mullins, C. Lewis, D. Winters (Foundation and Geotechnical Engineering, LLC),
under contract from Engineering and Software Consultants, Inc., for FHWA Office of Infrastructure.
Full document: https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/research/infrastructure/structures/bridge/09040/09040.pdf
This is a U.S. federal government work product (public domain). Excerpted below: Chapter 2
(State of the Practice, pages 3-14) and Chapter 4 (I-35W Bridge Foundation Monitoring, pages
39-88). Chapter 3 (a lab test specimen, not a deployed public bridge) and Chapter 5 (summary) are
omitted. Page markers (=== PDF PAGE n ===) mark original page boundaries for citation. Text was
extracted programmatically (pypdf) from the PDF; figure/graph captions are preserved but the
images themselves are not - treat photo/graph references as noted but not visually verifiable from
this excerpt.


=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
1 
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 
In order to develop safe, cost-effective, and reliable structures in the future, it is imperative for 
designers to cross-check assumptions made during the design phase with the conditions that the 
structure will actually experience. Ideally, the designer’s understanding of those conditions is 
reflected in the design, and the structure’s  response to such loads should show close agreement. 
However, in many cases, the worst-case scenarios controlling the design do not actually occur; 
therefore, the true structural design is never fully verified. This does not suggest that the design 
is unreasonable; rather, it indicates that the response to extreme loads remains somewhat 
hypothetical. In the instances where extreme events occur, there are rarely quantifiable measures 
of how the structure performed due to the absence of permanently installed or embedded 
instrumentation along with a continuously sampling acquisition methodology. More common 
and less critical loading states can and have been used to provide insight into the response that 
can be either extrapolated or used to provide a lesser degree of verification. However, this type 
of post-construction verification is not commonplace. 
Civil engineering applications are typically the last to adopt and/or receive the inroads into newer 
technological breakthroughs that are used in other arenas of science. Similar to the personal 
computer industry, advances in wireless microwave and satellite communications occur daily. 
Even some past technologies have not been fully implemented or explored with the exception of 
atypical high profile structures (i.e., in high-risk seismic regions). The upshot is that many past 
technologies are now relatively inexpensive and can be reasonably applied to civil-type 
structures more routinely.  
As a civil engineering application, remote monitoring has only begun to make a breakthrough 
into the field, having historically been used as a research and development tool. Its benefits are 
finally coming to realization. There is a push for the United States to become wireless; therefore, 
it has increasingly become a necessity for civil engineering to lead the way, specifically in the 
area of remote structural health monitoring (SHM). 
Remote monitoring, at its most basic, provides users with a way to collect data from an event, 
such as a foundation capacity test or ongoing thermal recording, and then transmit the collected 
data to another location, such as a database or spreadsheet file on a computer. This concept can 
be taken one step further by introducing limits on the data collector for alerting users or 
programming triggers on the data collector to initiate retroactive data collection and transmitting. 
Remote monitoring can be used for many different civil engineering applications, from quality 
assurance in construction to ongoing health verification. It can provide assurance to engineers 
and society as a whole that infrastructure withstands into the next generation. Furthermore, as 
new technology is upgraded, the cost and effectiveness benefits of remote monitoring continue to 
increase. As with all new approaches, they are not fully embraced by the construction and 
engineering society alike until there are recognizable savings. However, with catastrophic 
failures like the St. Anthony Falls Bridge (also referred  to as the I-35W bridge) collapse over the 
Mississippi River, additional pressure to investigate the use and/or require the implementation of 
new technological advances plays into acceptance.  

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
2 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
As a civil engineering tool, remote monitoring is a priceless benefit for the health monitoring of 
structural members. Currently, the most common monitoring technique for inspecting bridges is 
visual inspection. Based on standards set by the Florida Department of Transportation and the 
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), every bridge is required to undergo a visual 
inspection once every 2 years. While this method is satisfactory for structurally sufficient 
noncritical structures, it does not provide a reliable way to determine the actual health of a 
structure. Providing a remote monitoring system will allow researchers to monitor a bridge in 
real time at a remote location. This method will help reduce man hours and provide accurate 
results and up-to-date data to assess the structural integrity of a structure and not just its visual 
appearance. Foundations, however, are not readily amenable to retrofitted instrumentation 
regardless of whether or not remote monitoring is employed. Therefore, a concerted effort to 
incorporate these more peripheral options must be considered at the design phase for proper 
inclusion during construction. 
SCOPE AND SIGNIFICANCE 
This study provides a brief overview of previous foundation health monitoring schemes. It also 
proposes the use of wireless communication and Internet systems technologies as a means of 
providing remote monitoring capabilities for structural members or systems for agencies such as 
State transportation departments and FHWA. However, the use of these technologies as 
described is not limited to the use by these agencies. The original intent of the research was not 
to determine the best technology to carry out the project but rather to provide examples of 
monitoring procedures and data from a variety of tests that were monitored using this concept. 
Another focus of this study is to provide several different monitoring techniques that can be 
applied to a structural member to enable it to be monitored throughout its life. These techniques 
include sensors and devices that would provide data related to temperature, load, strain, and 
video recording. All of these parameters are vital for the determination of the structural health of 
a member or system. 
REPORT ORGANIZATION 
This report consists of five chapters. Chapter 1 introduces the topic of the report. Chapter 2 
summarizes the state of SHM in general with an emphasis on substructure health monitoring 
(SSHM) and the ability to convert current wired systems into wireless. Chapter 3 provides an  
in-depth look at a case study that was carried out on an innovative type of drilled shaft. It is used 
to highlight the convenience and, in some instances, limitations and considerations that should be 
addressed when planning a prototypical remote monitoring program. Therein, it summarizes the 
successes and learning experiences gained from this project. Chapter 4 discusses the culmination 
of all the work performed on this project and reviews the short- and long-term monitoring 
procedures implemented on the I-35W bridge. It also explains the construction, setup, 
instrumentation, monitoring procedure, and results for a full-scale remote SHM system.  
Chapter 5 summarizes the main discoveries made throughout the study and presents conclusions 
and recommendations for future work. 

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
3 
CHAPTER 2. STATE OF THE PRACTICE 
From an investigation into the state of the practice of SHM, it is evident that there are a number 
of different monitoring systems and techniques. All of them have their pros and cons, but each 
can be useful to a certain degree. Most of the advances in SHM have been made in the 
monitoring of the superstructure elements of bridges and other structures; however, the 
importance of SSHM cannot be underestimated. 
Since a large amount of the modern SHM technology is already widely used and documented as 
it pertains to superstructure monitoring, this review of the state of the practice will primarily 
focus on common technology and its practicality for use in a SSHM system. 
GENERAL MONITORING SYSTEMS 
Monitoring systems range in their functionality, cost, applied technology, and monitoring 
approach. A system generally contains three components: (1) a measuring device, (2) a method 
of reading that device, and (3) a method of storing the measurements. Depending on the 
complexity of the measurement being taken, the measuring device and readout component may 
be one and the same, such as dial gauges or pressure gauges (see figure 1).  
 
Figure 1. Photo. Standard rotary dial gauges. 
These devices convert a measurement parameter into mechanical gauge movement and can  
be considered the most basic of transducers as they transfer one physical aspect into another. 
Virtually all types of measurements have specialized devices to read that particular occurrence 
(i.e., time, displacement, velocity, acceleration, load, pressure, frequency, electromagnetic field 
(EMF), light intensity, strain, sound intensity, X-rays, voltage, inductance, capacitance, etc.).  

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
4 
For most measurement types, there are many ways to take those measurements, which in turn,  
dictate the capabilities and/or limitations of a monitoring system. 
The most basic systems use fully manual devices and readouts (e.g., dial gauges, proving rings, 
pressure gauges, etc.) coupled with manual record keeping. The limitations imposed on this 
method by requiring physical onsite personnel (i.e., recording/storage rate, man hours, and 
travel) are in some ways offset by the unforeseen observations and the ability to react to and 
record unplanned secondary happenings. The most exotic systems use complex measurement 
devices requiring sophisticated readout units coupled with a multifunctional data acquisition 
system (DAS) capable of sending the recorded data via cellular or satellite communications. 
These systems are often enabled to accept remote configuration/scheme changes, are self 
powered or self contained, and require little to no site visits. The most extreme cases of this type 
of system would likely be used by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration for space 
exploration because it is impossible to access the unit during use. Aside from the obvious cost, 
these systems are rarely adaptable to unforeseen occurrences. For SHM and SSHM applications, 
some midrange systems can be selected to provide a balance between equipment costs and 
required onsite man hours, which will allow most projects to be affordable. 
CASE STUDY 
One sample study performed by FHWA, the Washington State Department of Transportation,   
the city of Seattle, WA, and the bridge design team on the West Seattle freeway bridge 
incorporated a SSHM protocol.(1) This study is one of few that focused on substructural elements 
of a bridge pier during the construction of the bridge, as well as data collection over time. The 
West Seattle freeway bridge was built between 1981 and 1984. The original bridge was struck by 
a freighter in 1978 and was deemed inoperable as a result of the incident. The goal was to 
advance the state of the art of pile group design and analysis, and the information collected 
would be used in increasing pile group efficiency. 
Authorities in Seattle, WA, authorized the use of instrumentation on pier EA-31, which is a 
single-column pier that supports the eastbound approach ramp from Spokane Street near the East 
Waterway and the Duwamish River (see figure 2).(1)  

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
5 
 
Figure 2. Illustration. Pier EA-31 site map.(1) 
As stated previously, the purpose of this project was to improve the state of the art of pile group 
design and analysis. This was done by collecting information regarding the load distribution 
among the pile group, the load transfer from the piles to the soil, the portion of the load 
transferred from the pier footing to the piles, and the settlement of the pier footing. Furthermore, 
the results gathered from this data were compared with theoretical predictions that would either 
validate the theoretical models or allow for the modification of those models. 
In order to provide measurements for the data collection criteria, measurements were selected by 
first measuring pile tip load as well as the load at six elevations along the pile to determine the 
individual pile load distribution. A load cell placed at the pile tip permitted direct measurement 
of the load. Next, six telltale rods were installed on each pile to determine the pile tip 
displacement. The pile deformation measured by the rods was converted to strain and used as a 
check. Strain gauges were then installed at the top of the piles, which provided information about 
the load transferred from the pier footing to the individual piles. Settlement of the pier footing 

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
6 
was then measured by using a precise surveying measurement at the four corners of the footing. 
Last, soil settlement below the pier footing and within the pile group was measured to determine 
the soil’s reaction to the loading and subsequent deformation of the piles. 
In total, 3 of the 12 piles were instrumented with a load cell at the pile tip, along with  
6 elevations of strain gauge pairs and a 5-position telltale extensometer (see 1 ft = 0.305 m 
figure 3). Data from the instrumentation were collected in the field using portable manual 
readout units and recorded on field sheets. During construction, the measurements were made at 
irregular intervals dependent on accessibility and other constraints due to the construction 
progress. The instruments were monitored as each significant phase of construction was 
completed to provide realistic data from the construction process. Instrumentation monitoring 
was conducted throughout construction and continued through 1987, 5 years after the start of 
construction.(1) Data were again collected in September 1988, September 1989, and October 
1993. Two additional sets of data were taken in 1999 and 2002, which extended the period of 
monitoring to 20 years. The report presents a summary of the existing working gauges as well as 
the date at which failed gauges no longer worked (see table 1).(1) 

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
7 
 
1 ft = 0.305 m 
Figure 3. Illustration. Pier EA-31 pile instrumentation layout. 
 
 
 
 

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
8 
Table 1. Summary of gauge failures. 
Gauge Date of Failure 
Quadrant 1/pile 7 pile tip 
load cell transducer 5194 
Damaged during 
driving 
Rod extensometer anchor 
(pile 1, anchor 1) 
Failed during 
installation 
Strain 
gauges 
1-1-A 7/1999 
1-1-B 9/1988 
1-3-B 7/1999 
1-4-A 7/1999 
1-4-B 7/1999 
1-5-B 7/1999 
1-6-A 3/2002 
7-1-A 10/1987 
7-1-B 7/1999 
7-5-A 12/1984 
7-6-A 7/1999 
10-1-A 7/1987 
10-1-B 10/1987 
10-4-A 7/1999 
10-4-B 10/1993 
10-6-A 7/1999 
10-6-B 7/1999 
Note: At the 20-year mark, 17 of the 62 gauges (27 percent)  
were not functioning. In addition, 17 of the 36 underwater  
gauges were not functioning at the 20-year mark. 
As reported, all pile tip load cells were functioning after 20 years of service, with the exception  
of one transducer from pile 7, which was damaged during pile driving. From the data  
collected in 2002, the average load for all three piles was 94 tons (85.26 Mg) with a maximum 
deviation of approximately 11 percent (see 1 ton = 0.907 mg 
figure 4). This data suggest that some eccentricity was present wherein slightly more load was 
being taken by the eastern-most piles (represented by pile 1). 

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
9 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
1/1/82 1/1/84 1/1/86 1/1/88 1/1/90 1/1/92 1/1/94 1/1/96 1/1/98 1/1/00 1/1/02 1/1/04
Cell Load (Tons)
Pile 1 Pile 7 Pile 10
 
1 ton = 0.907 Mg 
Figure 4. Graph. Pier EA-31 tip load in 3 of the 12 piles. 
During the instrumentation phase, pairs of strain gauges were installed into the three monitored 
piles at six different levels along the pile. This provided 12 gauges in each pile for a total of  
36 strain gauges. All of these gauges were located beneath the groundwater level, and 17 of these 
gauges were no longer functioning after 20 years of service. However, all the gauges were 
reported to have worked until at least October 1987, which provided 4 years of data collection. 
Since all of the gauges were installed below the groundwater level, it is possible that their failure 
was due to the water resistance of the system. The data from the strain gauges that were still in 
commission were plotted over time (figure 5 through figure 7).(1) For piles 1 and 10, the average 
strain change in the pile was between -300 and -500 e (microstrain), with pile 1 being on the 
higher end of that range. However for pile 7, the average strain change in the pile was 
approximately -225 e . This suggests that the piles further away from the center of the pile cap 
where the column is sitting experienced more strain change likely due to bending. The gauges 
installed at the top of the other piles and the strain gauges in the column were all still functioning 
after 20 years. 

=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
10 
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
1/1/82 1/1/84 1/1/86 1/1/88 1/1/90 1/1/92 1/1/94 1/1/96 1/1/98 1/1/00 1/1/02 1/1/04
Average Strain Change (microstrain)
Pair 1 EL - 90 Pair 2 EL -73 Pair 3 EL - 55
Pair 4 EL - 38 Pair 5 EL - 22 Pair 6 EL - 6  
Figure 5. Graph. Pier EA-31 average strain change pile 1. 
 
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
1/1/82 1/1/84 1/1/86 1/1/88 1/1/90 1/1/92 1/1/94 1/1/96 1/1/98 1/1/00 1/1/02 1/1/04
Time
Average Strain Change (microstrain)
Pair 1 EL - 90 Pair 2 EL - 73 Pair 3 EL - 55 Pair 4 EL - 38 Pair 5 EL - 22 Pair 6 EL -6  
Figure 6. Graph. Pier EA-31 average strain change pile 7. 
 

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
11 
 
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
1/1/82 1/1/84 1/1/86 1/1/88 1/1/90 1/1/92 1/1/94 1/1/96 1/1/98 1/1/00 1/1/02 1/1/04
Average Strain Change (microstrain)
Pair 1 EL - 90 Pair 2 EL - 73 Pair 3 EL - 55 Pair 4 EL - 38 Pair 5 EL - 22 Pair 6 EL - 6
 
Figure 7. Graph. Pier EA-31 average strain change pile 10. 
This study showed that SSHM using wired gauges is extremely useful. With the advances in the 
durability of data collection and monitoring systems, it is likely that this same system, if installed 
today, would not have the number of failed gauges. While this study required a worker to be 
onsite to record the data, the usefulness of the instrumentation provided insight into the design of 
foundations and instrumentation. While the technology record-keeping used in this study is 
somewhat outdated, the types of instrumentation are readily applicable and available (in a more 
robust form) for future studies. Automated data acquisition, monitoring, and remote data 
recovery are also available for this type of instrumentation and could be easily retrofit to the 
existing gauges. 
WIRELESS SENSORS FOR HEALTH MONITORING 
Wireless instrumentation has two connotations: (1) truly wireless gauges that minimize or even 
eliminate wiring attached to instrumentation, which is the topic of this section and (2) wireless 
communication (cellular or satellite) with instrumentation that may or may not employ onsite 
gauge wiring between the transducers and the data logger. Remote monitoring in itself is not 
automatically wireless, but rather, it may make use of landline communication between the data 
logger and querying parties. 
Wireless systems use basically the same measurement devices (or transducers) as wired systems, 
but they use a transmitter and receiver system instead of lead wires. Wire costs range between 
$0.40 and $1.00 per 1 ft (0.305 m) per gauge and may require even greater expenses depending 
on the complexity of the installation site. Transmitters, similar to data logging equipment, are 
limited by their sampling and transmission rates—higher sampling rates come at higher costs 
with an upper rate limit of $5,000 to $10,000 samples/channel. The cost comparison of wireless 

=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
12 
to wired systems is generally site specific, but it leans toward wired systems. However, in the 
case of moveable structures or mechanical devices, slip rings or other features which allow the 
movements of the wires are required and tend to tip the scales in favor of wireless systems. 
Wireless sensors for SHM systems are used more frequently as the technology becomes more 
available. Since no wires are required between the gauges and the DAS, installation time and 
associated costs are reduced as compared to traditional wired systems. Typically, wireless 
sensors are installed over an entire structure to get a full mapping of the desired measurement 
(i.e., stress, strain, displacement, temperature, velocity, etc.) across the entire structure. A 
wireless DAS collects the data sent back from these sensors and stores the collected data to an 
onsite data logger. As with most health monitoring programs, almost all wireless instrumentation 
used to-date involve superstructure and not substructural elements. 
A study by Arms et al. introduced the idea of a SHM system in which the data acquisition 
software could be reprogrammed remotely.(2) The goal was that the operating parameters of a 
monitoring system, such as sampling rate, triggering parameters, downloading intervals, etc., 
should be alterable from a remote location. As a result, operators should never have to go back to 
the site after initial installation. This provides a fully remote monitoring system in which all the 
parameters of the data logging and collection can be altered from a separate location.(2) 
The wireless transmittable gauges were installed on the existing structure at main points of 
interest. Wireless sensors received transmitted data, and the data were uploaded to an onsite 
laptop (see figure 8). The laptop transmitted the data through a cellular uplink to the base station. 
From this base station, the software on the laptop could be altered to change the data collection 
parameters. The software could also be altered with trigger parameters so that the system could 
be sleeping but would wake up when an event occurred that increased the change in strain levels, 
such as a train crossing a bridge (see figure 9). 
 
Figure 8. Photo. Wireless data collection and transmit setup.(2) 





=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
31 
 
Figure 32. Photo. Voided shaft outer steel casing removal. 
 
Figure 33. Photo. Final voided shaft at ground level. 

=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
32 
MONITORING SYSTEM INSTRUMENTATION AND PROCEDURE 
Once the construction of the voided shaft was complete, all of the TC wires were accessed 
through the tubes so they could be attached to the data collection system. The remote monitoring 
system was composed of several parts: A Campbell Scientific, Inc. CR1000 data logger, an 
AM25T 25-channel multiplexer, a Campbell Scientific, Inc. Raven100 CDMA AirLink cellular 
modem, PS100 12-V power supply and 7-Ahr rechargeable battery, a 12W Solar Cell panel from 
Unidata, and a large environmental enclosure to protect all the materials from the elements  
(see figure 34 through figure 38). The total cost of the system including all equipment and 
ongoing services was approximately $4,500. The TC wires were connected to the multiplexer 
because there were not enough channels on the CR1000 to read all of the TCs. The multiplexer 
was then connected to the CR1000 (see figure 39). LoggerNet, the remote monitoring and data 
collection software from Campbell Scientific, Inc., was used to program the CR1000 for remote 
monitoring and data recovery. The data collection system was equipped with the solar panel to 
help sustain the battery voltage (see figure 40). The system was programmed to wake up every 
15 min, take a temperature reading, record it, and go back to sleep. The Raven100 modem was 
programmed to wake up once every 60 min and transmit the collected data back to the host 
computer for processing, which was stationed in the Geotechnical Research Group at USF. 
Sideline measurements of ground temperature for a companion study were taken 1D and 2D 
away from the shaft via an OMEGA OM-220 data logger that collected data at the same rate as 
the CR1000; however, the data were simply stored, and a site visit was required to collect that 
data. The remote system’s battery voltage was also monitored and sent to the host computer 
along with the thermal data so that the power consumption could be tracked. 
 
Figure 34. Photo. Campbell Scientific, Inc. CR1000 data logger. 
 
Figure 35. Photo. AM25T 25-channel multiplexer. 

=== PDF PAGE 41 ===
33 
 
Figure 36. Photo. Campbell Scientific, Inc. Raven100 CDMA AirLink cellular modem. 
 
Figure 37. Photo. Campbell Scientific, Inc. PS100 12-V power supply with rechargeable 
battery. 
 
Figure 38. Photo. Campbell Scientific, Inc. ENC12x14 environmental enclosure. 

=== PDF PAGE 42 ===
34 
 
Figure 39. Photo. TC wire connection from AM25t 25-channel multiplexer to  
CR1000 data logger. 
 
 
Figure 40. Photo. Remote thermal monitoring system for voided shaft. 
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS 
Overall, the system worked well. At one point during the monitoring period, there was a cellular 
timeout, and the modem stopped transmitting the data to the host computer. This was fixed by a 

=== PDF PAGE 43 ===
35 
site visit to reset the modem, and the problem did not occur again. However, the main problem 
that was encountered was an issue with power usage. At the beginning of the monitoring 
procedure, the Raven modem was left on and sent back data every hour, which used a large 
amount of power, and the system lost power after a few hours (see figure 41). The monitoring 
procedure was revised so that the modem would go to sleep and only wake up once every hour to 
transmit the collected data. Even with this alteration, the battery was still losing power relatively 
quickly. Once the battery voltage dropped below 11.6V, the data collection system had 
approximately 8 h of life before it quit. Due to this large amount of power usage, three site visits 
were required to recharge the battery. These visits are seen in the plot of the battery voltage over 
time (see figure 42). In order to provide a completely remote unit, a larger solar cell was 
recommended because the 12W did not provide enough power to make the system fully remote. 
 
Figure 41. Graph. Battery voltage of thermal monitoring system as of October 8, 2007. 

=== PDF PAGE 44 ===
36 
 
Figure 42. Graph. Battery voltage of thermal monitoring system as of December 14, 2007. 
Originally, the data collection period was supposed to last until the temperature in the shaft had 
reached equilibrium. However, in reviewing the data, the temperatures recorded from the soil 
surrounding the shaft were increasing while the temperatures within the shaft had reached 
equilibrium (see figure 43). Therefore, data collection continued for another period of time until 
it was determined that the temperatures both in the shaft and in the surrounding soil had reached 
equilibrium. From the final temperature plot, it is evident that the temperature in the soil 1D 
away from the shaft was the last to eventually reach equilibrium. It can also be seen that the 
temperature in the soil at 2D away from the shaft was affected only slightly by the heat coming 
from the shaft (see f = 1.8(c) + 32 
figure 44). 

=== PDF PAGE 45 ===
37 
 
F = 1.8(C) + 32 
Figure 43. Graph. TC data from voided shaft as of November 12, 2007. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PDF PAGE 46 ===
38 
 
F = 1.8(C) + 32 
Figure 44. Graph. Final average TC data for all locations. 

=== PDF PAGE 47 ===
39 
CHAPTER 4. I-35W BRIDGE FOUNDATION MONITORING 
On August 1, 2007, the I-35W bridge over the Mississippi River in Minneapolis, MN, collapsed 
in the middle of rush hour. The collapse killed 13 people and revealed to engineers the United 
States’ failing infrastructure. Part of this study proposes that a catastrophe such as this may be 
prevented through the use of remote monitoring systems with the capability to alert users when 
certain structural members reach a predetermined level of stress. In order to fully understand the 
forces induced into a structure such as a bridge, the Minnesota Department of Transportation 
(MnDOT), FHWA, the USF Geotechnical Research Group, and Foundation & Geotechnical 
Engineering (FGE), LLC teamed to provide a remote monitoring system that would provide 
much of this information. As MnDOT rebuilt I-35W, a number of substructural members 
provided real-time information about the stresses on the bridge. Figure 45 shows the pier 
selected to demonstrate the monitoring system. 
 
Figure 45. Illustration. I-35W bridge over the Mississippi River. 
This study was broken into three phases: (1) real-time monitoring of the mass concrete effects in 
the drilled shaft foundation elements, (2) real-time monitoring of construction loads transmitted 
first into the drilled shafts and second into the columns as they came into play, and (3) long-term 
monitoring of the bridge loads and performance.  
The first phase occurred during the construction of the concrete drilled shafts or caissons and the 
pier footing that ties the drilled shafts together. TCs were placed in the rebar cages of the shafts 
and throughout the pier footing and were used to determine the core temperatures of the mass 

=== PDF PAGE 48 ===
40 
concrete elements. This part of the study was similar to the voided shaft study that was discussed 
in chapter 3. 
The second phase of the study slightly overlapped the first phase in that it involved the drilled 
shafts, but it also branched upward to the columns. Two different types of strain gauges were 
placed in the rebar cages of the shafts and at the center height of the columns. These were used to 
more accurately determine the load induced in the shafts by the pier footing, columns, 
superstructure, and the loads induced in the columns by the bridge superstructure during the 
bridge construction. Furthermore, as each new section of the concrete box-girder superstructure 
was added to the columns, the added weights of the sections were correlated to the strain in the 
columns measured by the installed gauges. This provided more accurate calibrations that were 
used in the ongoing health monitoring of the bridge, which was the third phase of the project. 
The third phase uses the same strain gauges that were embedded in the shafts and columns, 
including the strain gauges that will be installed in the superstructure components of the bridge. 
The final phase of the project will monitor the loads on the bridge throughout its service life, 
which can be used to determine the structural health of the bridge and provide MnDOT and 
FHWA with real-time strain and load data from the bridge (see figure 46). 
Event 
Schedule
Project 
Phase I
Project 
Phase II
Project 
Phase III
Footing Concrete 
Curing
Footing 
Instrumentation
Footing 
Construction
Shaft 
Instrumentation
Shaft 
Construction
Shaft Concrete 
Curing
Long-Term 
Health Monitoring
Bridge 
Completion
Superstructure 
Construction
Column Lift 3
Column 
Instrumentation
Column Lift 2
Column Lift 1
 
Figure 46. Illustration. Event schedule and overlap of I-35W bridge project phases. 
PHASE I—THERMAL MONITORING 
As stated previously, in phase I, researchers monitored the internal temperatures of the mass 
concrete elements (drilled shafts and pier footing). While the overall procedure of the thermal 
monitoring was similar to the voided shaft study, there were some major differences. First, the 
shafts were solid and not voided. Second, the ambient temperature at the site was much different. 
As seen in figure 43 and f = 1.8(c) + 32 
figure 44, in the Tampa Bay, FL, area during the monitoring period, the air temperature ranged 
from approximately 99.86 to 64.94 F (37.7 to 18.3 C). During the construction and thermal 
monitoring period in Minnesota, the temperature ranged from approximately 34.88 to -10 F (1.6 
to -23.3 C). This was expected to have a significant  
effect on the temperatures reached by the mass concrete elements. 

=== PDF PAGE 49 ===
41 
Construction and Instrumentation 
Prior to construction and installation of the drilled shafts, the instrumentation for the thermal 
monitoring was put into place. The first step of the placement was the instrumentation of the 
reinforcement cage for the drilled shafts. The reinforcement cage was built using high-strength 
longitudinal steel and mild stirrup steel. The cage had 2.48-inch (20.63-mm) threaded 
longitudinal bars with #6 bar circular ties at 5 inches (127 mm ) on the center. Locking wheel 
cage spacers were placed along the reinforcement cage to maintain 6 inches (152.4 mm) of clear 
cover (see figure 47). 
 
Figure 47. Photo. I-35W bridge shaft reinforcement cage construction. 
After the reinforcement cages were assembled, they were instrumented with TCs and strain 
gauges. The strain gauges are discussed in the section on phase II. The TCs were installed in 
pairs at 4 levels along the shafts, later named GL1, GL2, GL3, and GL4, for a total of 10 TCs per 
shaft (2 TCs were installed in the center of the shaft near the top on a 20-ft (6.1-m) rebar placed 
after concreting). GL4 was located at the bottom of the shaft, GL3 was located at the top of 
competent rock, GL2 was located at the bottom of the permanent casing (top of weak rock),  
and GL1 was located at the top of the shaft (see figure 48). The wires from the TCs were  
bundled with the wires from the strain gauges and run to the top of the shafts in two groups  
(see figure 49). 

=== PDF PAGE 50 ===
42 
 
Figure 48. Illustration. I-35W bridge gauge levels on drilled shafts. 
 
Figure 49. Photo. Cable bundles in reinforcement cage for I-35W bridge. 
After the cages were fully instrumented, the excavations for the shafts were made. The shafts 
were drilled with two distinct sections. The top section was 7 ft (2.1 m) in diameter with a  
0.50-inch (12.7-mm)-thick permanent steel casing surrounded by soil (see figure 50). The casing 
was necessary to keep the excavation clear. The casing ran approximately 3 ft (0.92 m) below the 
level of bedrock. The lower section was 6.5 ft (1.9 m) in diameter with no steel casing. GL2, 
GL3, and GL4 were located in this lower section of the shaft. After the excavation was created, 
the reinforcement cages were lifted and lowered into the excavation (see figure 51). After 

=== PDF PAGE 51 ===
43 
reinforcement cage placement, the concrete for the shafts was poured with a single tremie. Upon 
removal of the tremie after concrete placement, a rebar instrumented with two additional TCs 
was inserted down the center of the shaft. The wires from all the TCs and strain gauges were run 
out through a 1.5-inch (38.1-mm)-diameter schedule 40 PVC conduit that was placed running 
out through the top of the shaft, underneath the future pier footing that would be constructed, and 
out to the DASs that were installed on site (see figure 52). 
 
Figure 50. Photo. Top section of drilled shaft for I-35W bridge. 
 
Figure 51. Photo. Placement of reinforcement cage for I-35W bridge shaft. 
 

=== PDF PAGE 52 ===
44 
 
Figure 52. Photo. Conduits running from shafts to DAS boxes. 
Two of the eight shafts were instrumented (see figure 52), and when all eight shafts were 
finished, time was alotted for the concrete to cure, the installation of the formwork, and 
reinforcement for the pier footing. The pier 2 footing was 81.02 ft (24.7 m) long by 34 ft  
(10.4 m) wide by 14 ft (4.8 m) tall (see figure 53) and was designed to support two columns  
(one for each concrete box girder section). It was reinforced with three layers of #18 bars at the 
bottom of the footing and three layers of #18 bars at the top. Along the top, W-shaped steel  
was used to support the reinforcing bars to prevent excess bending. TCs were installed at the 
base, the center, and the top of the footing. These TC wires were run out through a 2-inch  
(50.8-mm)-diameter schedule 40 PVC conduits down and out of the footing to the DAS boxes 
alongside the conduits from the shafts. The massive footing was equipped with PVC cooling 
tubes cast into the footing to help mitigate the mass concrete effects (see figure 54). 

=== PDF PAGE 53 ===
45 
 
Figure 53. Photo. Lower layer of pier footing reinforcement for I-35W bridge. 
 
Figure 54. Photo. Upper layer of pier footing reinforcement for I-35W bridge. 
Monitoring Setup and Procedure 
For phase I of the study, the data collection was split into two subphases: the first phase 
consisted of the thermal monitoring of the shaft, and the second phase consisted of the thermal 
monitoring of the pier footing. The two phases were done similarly, and the setup for the thermal 
monitoring system was similar to the setup used in the voided shaft study discussed in chapter 3. 

=== PDF PAGE 54 ===
46 
The system was made up of the following pieces: a Campbell Scientific, Inc. CR1000 data 
logger, an AM25T 25-channel multiplexer, a Campbell Scientific, Inc. Raven100 CDMA 
AirLink cellular modem, PS100 12-V power supply and 7-Ahr rechargeable battery, and a large 
environmental enclosure to protect all the materials from the elements (see figure 55). From the 
voided shaft study, it was discovered that a larger solar panel was needed to provide power to the 
system. As a result, a 35-W solar cell panel was utilized (see figure 56). 
 
Figure 55. Photo. Thermal monitoring DAS for I-35W bridge shafts. 
 

=== PDF PAGE 55 ===
47 
 
Figure 56. Photo. 35-W solar cell panel for I-35W bridge monitoring system. 
The thermal monitoring procedure was identical to that of the voided shaft study. A thermal data 
sample was taken every 15 min and stored to the data logger at the same interval. Every hour, the 
Raven modem sent the collected data to the host computer at USF for data analysis. Once this 
data were received, they were automatically interpreted and plotted for use on the USF 
Geotechnical Research Web site. This thermal data from the shafts were collected from  
January 9 through January 21, 2008. At this time, the TC wires from the shaft were 
disconnected; however, the vibrating wire strain gauges (discussed in phase II) came with a 
thermistor. This thermistor was used to continue the thermal data from the shafts. The thermal 
data from the pier footing were collected from February 6 through February 25, 2008. No strain 
gauges were installed in the pier footing, so the only thermal data collected were stopped after 
this date. As with the voided shaft study, the battery voltage for the data logger was also 
monitored so that the logger did not lose power. 
Along with the thermal monitoring setup, a CC640 camera was set up to take hourly photographs 
of the construction site (figure 57 and figure 58). (Note that the black bars in figure 57 are 
pointing to the camera.) It was powered by the same solar panel as the thermal monitoring 
system. The photos taken by the camera were sent back with the data collected from the TCs by 
the CR1000. The camera was useful for the thermal monitoring phase, but it was really installed 
as an aid in the construction load monitoring phase, which is  
discussed later. 
 
 
 
 

=== PDF PAGE 56 ===
48 
 
 
Figure 57. Photo. CC640 jobsite camera with perspective outlines. 
 
Figure 58. Photo. Sample camera shot from close-up camera on I-35W bridge. 
System Results and Conclusions 
The thermal monitoring procedure fared well. From the information gathered from the voided 
shaft study about the power consumption, the 35-W solar cell panel worked much better, and the 
battery voltage never dipped below 12V (see figure 59). Twice during the thermal monitoring 
phase, the system lost and then regained cellular communication with the host server. These 
occurrences seemed to correspond with the use of a large electric power plant directly adjacent 

=== PDF PAGE 57 ===
49 
the system’s cellular modem. This type of EMF is known to adversely affect such systems and is 
therefore a reasonable explanation. Other than these interferences, the thermal monitoring system 
worked as planned. 
 
Figure 59. Graph. Data logger battery voltage from I-35W bridge monitoring system. 
The concrete mix that was used was self-consolidating concrete that was designed to have a 
lower heat of hydration (see figure 60). Therefore, the temperature traces were expected to be 
lower than that of the voided shaft study. The thermal data from shaft 1 showed that the general 
average temperature attained in the concrete was 89.96 F (32.2 C) in the cage, and the two TCs 
at the core recorded higher temperatures of 125.96 F (52.2 C), which was a 36-F (20-C) 
difference (see f = 1.8(c) + 32 
figure 61). Similarly, in shaft 2, the TCs mounted in the cage recorded an average temperature of 
84.92 F (29.4 C), while the two TCs at the core recorded a higher temperature of 109.94 F 
(43.3 C), which was a 25-F (13.9-C) difference (see figure 62). 

=== PDF PAGE 58 ===
50 
 
Figure 60. Diagram. Concrete mix design for drilled shafts on I-35W bridge. 

=== PDF PAGE 59 ===
51 
 
F = 1.8(C) + 32 
Figure 61. Graph. I-35W bridge southbound pier 2 shaft 1 thermal data. 
 
 

=== PDF PAGE 60 ===
52 
 
F = 1.8(C) + 32 
Figure 62. Graph. I-35W bridge southbound pier 2 shaft 2 thermal data. 
As discussed in the monitoring procedure, the TC wires from the shafts were cut on  
January 21, 2008, and the thermal data were no longer collected. Upon connection of the 
vibrating wire gauges from the shafts, the thermistors started to collect thermal data again. These 
thermal data were analyzed and compiled with the data from the TCs, and the continuation of the 
thermal curves were plotted (see figure 63 and figure 64). 

=== PDF PAGE 61 ===
53 
 
F = 1.8(C) + 32 
Figure 63. Graph. I-35W bridge shaft 1 thermal data from TCs and thermistors. 
 
F = 1.8(C) + 32 
Figure 64. Graph. I-35W bridge shaft 2 thermal data from TCs and thermistors. 

=== PDF PAGE 62 ===
54 
As stated previously, the thermal data from the pier footing was collected from February 6 
through February 25, 2008 (see f = 1.8(c) + 32 
figure 65). As seen on the plot of the temperature over time, the TC in the extreme center of the 
footing recorded a maximum temperature of approximately  
140 F (60 C), while the TC at the center bottom of the footing only reached a temperature of 
approximately 90 F (32.2 C). The same concrete mix was used throughout the pier footing, so 
it should all have been roughly the same temperature; however, the ambient temperature, which 
ranged from 40 to -10 F (4.4 to -23.3 C), caused the temperatures to drop drastically closer to 
the outside edges of the footing. 
 
F = 1.8(C) + 32 
Figure 65. Graph. Pier 2 southbound footing thermal data from TCs. 
PHASE II—CONSTRUCTION  LOAD MONITORING 
This phase of the study expands from the voided shaft study. In phase II, the loads placed on the 
shafts by the pier footing, columns, and segments of the superstructure were monitored. As 
shown in figure 46, this phase actually began at the start of the footing construction, but no data 
were expected until the shaft cured and the footing concrete was poured. 

=== PDF PAGE 63 ===
55 
For the section on construction and instrumentation, there was obviously an overlap with the 
construction sequence. Therefore, this section of the report does not go into detail about the 
construction of the drilled shafts nor of the pier footing. However, more emphasis is placed on 
the strain gauges that were installed in the drilled shafts. For the pier columns, however, the 
construction and instrumentation is explained. Focus is provided to the construction phases of the 
column and how it affected the construction loads placed on the drilled shafts. 
Construction and Instrumentation 
The strain gauges used in this study were provided by Geokon, Inc.TM. They were model 4911 
“sister bars” and were specifically made for ease of installation (see 1 inch = 25.4 mm 
figure 66). They came with the strain gauge preinstalled on a 54.25-inch (1,377.95-mm) length 
of #4 bar. This bar was then tied to the existing reinforcement in the shaft or column. Since the 
gauge was on a #4 bar, it did not provide enough extra steel area that the cross section of the 
element was altered (providing the element was quite large). Therefore, it only minimally 
affected the calculations of converting strain to load. The strain gauges in the shafts were 
installed at the same four levels as the TCs: GL1, GL2, GL3, and GL4 (see figure 48). However, 
two types of strain gauges were used. At each level, 4 vibrating wire (VW) strain gauges and 2 
resistance (RT) strain gauges were installed, which made for a total of 16 VW gauges and 8 RT 
gauges per shaft. The VW gauges were installed at a 90-degree separation (see figure 67), with 
the RT gauges at 180-degree separation coupled with the VW gauges (see figure 68). The VW 
gauges, as explained in phase I, came equipped with a thermistor. These gauges were not capable 
of recording strains at high rates (for dynamic measurements), which was why RT gauges were 
also installed. 
 
1 inch = 25.4 mm 
Figure 66. Illustration. Detail of Geokon, Inc.TM 4911 sister bar strain gauges. 
 

=== PDF PAGE 64 ===
56 
 
Figure 67. Photo. VW gauge installed in shaft reinforcement cage. 
 
Figure 68. Photo. Coupled VW (blue cable) and RT (green cable) gauges.  
At each main pier, two reinforced concrete columns sat on top of the footing to support the 
superstructure for one direction of traffic. The columns were constructed with a varying cross 
section (see figure 45). The critical cross section was at the midheight of the columns where the 
strain gauges were placed. The columns were cast in three separate pours. 
First, the longitudinal bars running up through the columns were spliced to the longitudinal bars 
embedded in the pier footing (see figure 69). Then, the formwork for the lower half of the 
column was set in place. The first pour was a small 200-yd3 (182.8-m3) pour to get the column 
started. After that, the horizontal reinforcement was set inside the formwork up to the midheight 

=== PDF PAGE 65 ===
57 
of the column. After the horizontal steel was in place, the next level of longitudinal steel was 
spliced to the first level so that the bottom of the bars were embedded in the lower half of the 
column. After the reinforcement up to midheight was installed, the second pour occurred. This 
second pour placed the concrete up to midheight of the column (see figure 70). During the next 
phase of construction, the formwork for the top half of the column was placed, and the horizontal 
steel in the column was installed. The column midheight strain gauge installation also took  
place at this time. The critical section of the column was 8 by 16 ft (2.44 by 4.88 m) with 
reinforcement that consisted of 44 #20 bars (see figure 71). 
 
Figure 69. Photo. Reinforcement for first column pour for I-35W bridge columns. 
 

=== PDF PAGE 66 ===
58 
 
Figure 70. Photo. Reinforcement at midsection of columns for I-35W bridge. 
 
Figure 71. Photo. Longitudinal and horizontal column reinforcement. 
The total instrumentation for each column consisted of four vibrating wire strain gauges and four 
resistance-type strain gauges. The same coupled gauges that were installed in the shafts were 
used in the columns (one VW gauge and one RT gauge per sister bar). One sister bar unit was 
installed at each corner of the column in the critical section (see figure 72). By placing the 
gauges in the corners of the cross section, the strain at the extreme fiber of the column could be 

=== PDF PAGE 67 ===
59 
measured. Once the gauge installation units were tied and secured in place (see figure 73), the 
wires were run out of the top of the column formwork so that the cables could be bundled 
together. Then, the wires were brought back down to the midsection of the column and were run 
out through the 2-inch (50.8-mm) schedule 40 PVC conduit that extended up to the midheight of 
the columns (see figure 74). The wires ran through the conduit, down the column and shaft cap, 
and out to the temporary DAS that was installed on site. In addition to these strain gauges, the 
University of Minnesota Department of Civil Engineering also placed five strain gauges in each 
column that was installed in the same locations as those done by the FHWA team, but with an 
additional gauge located in the center of the column. The wires for these gauges were bundled 
with the wires from the FHWA gauges and pulled out to the DAS at the same time. These cables 
were grey (as opposed to blue and green used by FHWA) and can be seen clearly in figure 74. 
No presentation or analysis of the University of Minnesota gauges is presented herein. 
 
Figure 72. Photo. Coupled gauge installed in corner of column of I-35W bridge. 

=== PDF PAGE 68 ===
60 
 
Figure 73. Photo. Gauge wires tied and secured in column of I-35W bridge. 
 
Figure 74. Photo. Wires exiting through conduit. 
Monitoring Setup and Procedure 
For phase II of the study, the data collection was split into two subphases: the load monitoring of 
the shaft and the load monitoring of the columns. The reason for this split was that a large 
amount of dead load on the shaft came from the construction of the pier footing and the columns. 
Furthermore, if the loads on the shafts were monitored first, checking that the measured loads 

=== PDF PAGE 69 ===
61 
were correct was much easier because the load was simply the dead load of the footing and 
columns. Each phase of monitoring was carried out in the same way. The monitoring setup and 
procedure is explained through a discussion of the three different systems that were installed and 
used during this phase of the study. 
System 1 was the same thermal monitoring system that was used in phase I of the study as well 
as the voided shaft study discussed in chapter 3. It was reused during this phase of the study as 
the monitoring and transmission system for the CC640 field camera. The camera was set up to 
take a picture every hour and then transmit that picture back to the host computer via the cellular 
modem. During the thermal monitoring phase of the study, system 1 was powered by the 
installed solar cell panel with a backup deep cycle battery. During phase II, the system was 
moved to alternating current (A/C) power, but a deep cycle battery was kept in reserve in case 
the A/C power was disrupted. This A/C power was provided by the U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers who had an A/C power source adjacent the site. 
The second and third systems were installed at almost the same time, but they had different 
capabilities and assignments. System 2 was designated to collect data from the vibrating wire 
gauges installed in shafts 1 and 2 as well as those in the interior and exterior columns. This 
system also recorded the gauge temperatures via changes in thermistor resistance. A total of  
50 vibrating wire gauges and 50 thermistors were connected to this logger via two AVW200 
two-channel spectrum analyzers. Each channel of the AVW200 units was connected to a low-
power multiplexer (MUX) 16/32B (four in all). MUX 1 was connected to shaft 2 (16 gauges), 
MUX 2 was connected to shaft 1 (16 gauges), MUX 3 was connected to the interior column  
(10 gauges), and MUX 4 was connected to the exterior column (10 gauges) (see figure 75). The 
true value of the AVW200 data was unused because many pieces of data quality were recorded 
along with the raw strain and temperature values of interest. These additional measures of data 
quality (e.g., signal-to-noise ratio, etc., four total) were intended to provide insight into the health 
of the gauge and triple the required storage space and to significantly reduce the overall duration 
of monitoring without remote collection from the circular data buffer. At the rate of storage, the 
number of channels monitored, and amount of on-board memory, only a 2-week period could be 
stored before circular overwrite. However, with hourly collections, this was never a problem.  

=== PDF PAGE 70 ===
62 
 
Figure 75. Photo. Wire connection to system 2. 
The system monitoring the VW gauges (system 2) used a Campbell Scientific, Inc. CR1000 
data logger, while the system monitoring the RT gauges (system 3) used a Campbell Scientific, 
Inc. CR9000 data logger. System 2 worked similarly to the thermal monitoring system. A 
sample was taken and stored to the data logger every 15 min. Every hour, this stored information 
was sent back to the host computer at USF to be compiled and analyzed. System 3 took a sample 
at a rate of 100 Hz (100 samples per second). However, all of the data were not stored. Rather, 
the mean, maximum, and minimum of these samples were stored every 15 min. Then, every 
hour, the stored data points were sent back to the host computer similar to the data from system 
2. This provided the user with a better idea of the strain in the system because of the high 
sampling rate. However, this method used a large amount of power. The monitoring system 
sampling and storage rates and other information are provided in table 2. Due to differences in 
the two DAS board configurations, each system had a dedicated Campbell Scientific, Inc. 
Raven100 CDMA AirLink cellular modem. Three large environmental enclosures were used to 
house and protect the DAS units and wire connections from the elements (see figure 76). 
Table 2. Summary of monitoring systems for I-35W bridge monitoring study. 
System 
Parameter System 1 System 2 System 3 
Gauge type TCs 
VW strain gauges 
thermistors RT strain gauges 
Data logger CR1000  CR1000 CR9000 
Sampling rate 15 min 15 min 100 Hz 
Storage rate 15 min 15 min 
15 min (sample mean, 
sample max, and  
standard deviation) 
Transmit rate 1 h 1 h 1 h 

=== PDF PAGE 71 ===
63 
 
Figure 76. Photo. Construction load monitoring systems (VW = blue (right) and  
RT = green (left)). 
For this phase, it was known that a large amount of power would be consumed by the monitoring 
systems. Therefore, it was necessary to provide the systems with enough backup power to 
prevent power problems similar to the voided shaft study. Each system was integrated with a 
deep cell battery that provided power in case of a power failure (see figure 76). However, there 
was a problem with this system; the PS100 12-V power supply that recharges the 7-Ahr battery 
could only receive power from either an A/C source or the solar panel but not both. Therefore, a 
battery manager was installed to bypass this limitation.  
As with the thermal data from the shafts, once these data were received and reviewed, 
researchers plotted the data online at http://geotech.eng.usf.edu/I35.html. The strain in the shafts 
at the four different levels was monitored beginning on February 6, 2008, with the pier footing 
concrete placement. The strain data from the shafts were computed into construction loads, and 
an annotated graph was updated online (see 1 kip = 454 kg  
1 yd = 0.914 m 
1 ft = 0.305 m 
figure 77). Along with this graph, pictures from these events were captured using the CC640 
field camera, and they could be related to the points of interest on the graph. This aided in 
verifying the loading event and the amount of load that was calculated in the shaft (see figure 78 
through figure 81). 

=== PDF PAGE 72 ===
64 
 
1 kip = 454 kg  
1 yd = 0.914 m 
1 ft = 0.305 m 
Figure 77. Graph. Shaft construction loads and events. 
 
Figure 78. Photo. Pier footing concrete placement. 

=== PDF PAGE 73 ===
65 
 
Figure 79. Photo. Lift 1 column concrete placement. 
 
Figure 80. Photo. Interior column lift 2 formwork placement. 
 

=== PDF PAGE 74 ===
66 
 
Figure 81. Photo. Exterior column lift 2 formwork placement. 
As seen in figure 81, the column foundation became too large to view in its entirety by the close-
up camera location. Therefore, the CC640 field camera was moved to a new location on top of 
the University of Minnesota BOBMAIN building on the southwest bank of the river. This new 
position afforded oversight of the entire project from end bent to end bent and was used to 
dovetail recorded strains to construction events (see figure 82). 
 
Figure 82. Photo. New perspective from CC640 field camera. 

=== PDF PAGE 75 ===
67 
System Performance 
The three monitoring systems used during the construction load monitoring phase fared well. 
System 1 lost and then regained communication with the host server twice. These occurrences 
seemed to correspond with the use of a large electric power plant directly adjacent the system’s 
cellular modem. This type of EMF was known to adversely affect such systems and was 
therefore a reasonable explanation. As stated in the monitoring procedure, system 1 was 
repositioned in early March 2008. This system worked without issues from March 5, 2008, to 
March 19, 2008, when communication between the camera and logger failed. Review of the 
system revealed the camera was still recording images to its internal compact flash card, but 
images were not transferred to the logger for scheduled collection. Subsequent baud rate 
reduction cleared the problem. 
As stated in the monitoring procedure, power consumption was a large concern for this phase of 
monitoring. The power of system 1 was stable throughout this phase. The system was originally 
completely powered by solar energy, and a deep cycle battery was used as a backup. In early 
March 2008, the power source was switched to constant A/C (with battery backup) and provided 
the system with more stabile voltage (see figure 83). At no time did the voltage approach the 
critical logger shutdown voltage. Results of both the close-up pictures and the overview pictures 
are shown in figure 78 through figure 82. 
 
Figure 83. Graph. System 1 battery voltage over time. 
The results of system 2 were a little less desirable. The cellular communication with this system 
became somewhat of a concern with regards to reliability. This system, which was similar to 
system 1, logged data that were collected without issue from February 5 through March 26, 
2008. For a short period following this time frame, no collections were possible. It was unclear 

=== PDF PAGE 76 ===
68 
whether the system was still powered and logging; however, up until the last collection, the 
power cycles were regular (see figure 84). Since the critical threshold voltage of 11.2V was  
not approached at any time, it was unlikely that power interruption was the cause of the 
communication errors. The concern with the intermittent communication was resolved, but the 
data collected from one of the four multiplexing units responsible for monitoring nine of the 
vibrating wire gauges were unintelligible. An onsite visit was required to find a partially cut wire 
between the MUX unit and AVW-200, and it had started as intermittent and ultimately resulted 
in complete failure. Simple repair of this connection resumed full operation; data from this time 
period were not obtained from those gauges. 
 
Figure 84. Graph. System 2 battery voltage over time. 
The results of system 3 were better than those of system 2 because communication never 
faltered. The primary difference between this system and the other two was the logger type, 
CR9000 versus CR1000, the latter of which had not been consistent. The battery voltage of 
system 3 varied less than the battery voltage of system 2, yet neither system exhibited a power 
disruption (see figure 85). 

=== PDF PAGE 77 ===
69 
 
Figure 85. Graph. System 2 versus system 3 battery voltage. 
Once a sufficient amount of data were collected, the host Web site for the data review  
was modified to include hover points associated with pathways to videos or data locations  
(see figure 86). The link to the south camera perspective takes the user to a page that shows a 
video made of time lapse photos taken by the CC640 field camera in its altered position atop the 
University of Minnesota building. The link to the west camera allows users to navigate to a page 
that shows a video made of time lapse photos taken from the Web camera set up by MnDOT. 
The pier 2 close-up camera link shows a video made of time lapse photos taken by the CC640 
field camera in its original close-up position. All of these videos provide a quick look at the 
construction progress of the bridge from different vantage points and were used to relate the 
strain data to specific construction events. The FHWA SSHM site link (http://geotech. 
eng.usf.edu/I35.html) takes users to a separate page with a close-up view of the site with more 
hover points (see figure 87). Each link takes users to a plot of the strain of that subject over time 
(see figure 88 through figure 91). These graphs were broken down into daily increments as 
shown by the dotted lines running vertically on the graphs. The spaces between these dotted lines 
are links that take users to the pages with the Web cameras showing the construction progress up 
to that date. This way, the strain data can be more accurately related to construction events. 
Negative values on the graphs indicate compression. 

=== PDF PAGE 78 ===
70 
 
Figure 86. Illustration. Hover points on the main page of St. Anthony Falls Bridge health 
monitoring Web site.(9) 
 
Figure 87. Illustration. Instrumentation scheme for the St. Anthony Falls Bridge health 
monitoring project. 

=== PDF PAGE 79 ===
71 
 
Figure 88. Graph. Pier 2 interior column strain. 
 
Figure 89. Graph. Pier 2 exterior column strain. 

=== PDF PAGE 80 ===
72 
 
Figure 90. Graph. Pier 2 shaft 2 all levels strain. 
 
Figure 91. Graph. Pier 2 shaft 1 all levels strain. 

=== PDF PAGE 81 ===
73 
The load on pier 2 was somewhat complicated by indeterminate reactions from false work used 
to support the cast-in-place span 1 box girders (from end bent 1 to pier 2). As a result, the total 
load from span 1 was not felt by pier 2 until the bridge was almost completed and as the false 
work was removed. Precast box girder sections (timeline indicated in figure 92 and figure 93)  
were installed almost daily, extending from pier 2 toward pier 3 and cantilevered out over the  
Mississippi River. However, by correlating the number of box sections and their respective 
weights to the measured strain in each column, the column strain gauges were calibrated with 
increased confidence. Figure 94 shows the computed load from strain, concrete modulus, area as 
a function of the logging, and the theoretical reaction due to the known concrete box girder 
weights using lever arm. 
 
1 kip = 454 kg 
Figure 92. Graph. Shaft 1 loads throughout the entire construction sequence. 

=== PDF PAGE 82 ===
74 
 
1 kip = 454 kg 
Figure 93. Graph. Shaft 2 loads throughout the entire construction sequence. 
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
20000
5/12/08 6/1/08 6/21/08 7/11/08 7/31/08 8/20/08
Load (kips)
Interior Column
Exterior Column
Segment Loads
 
1 kip = 454 kg 
Figure 94. Graph. Column loads compared with segment placement. 

=== PDF PAGE 83 ===
75 
Unlike the shaft gauges located beneath the footing, column loads were subject to daily 
temperature fluctuations, which can be seen in figure 94. Additionally, the stark difference 
between the calculated segment load effects on the overall column load was caused by relaxation 
of the false work support as the cantilevering load provided uplift throughout span 1.  
Construction Phase Monitoring Completion 
Recall that only two shafts out of the eight in pier 2 (southbound) were instrumented; both were 
on the south edge of the footing, providing similar responses to the construction loads when 
considering column bending effects. Unfortunately, the load carried by the other six shafts was 
not monitored, and the response therein could only be estimated based on engineering principles. 
Figure 92 and figure 93 show the loads (as converted from measured strains, positive 
compression) detected in shafts 1 and 2. These figures are annotated to show several significant 
points in the construction sequence that help explain changes in the load versus time relationship. 
By looking at both the shaft response and the column strains, a clearer picture of the loading can 
be obtained. Figure 95 and figure 96 show the strains recorded for both the interior and exterior 
columns found on the same eight shafts beneath pier 2 southbound. The increased compressive 
loads (positive sign) shown in shafts 1 and 2 correspond to expansion required to obtain the 
necessary tolerances followed by jacking closure at the center span misalignment. This is shown 
by the increased compression strain on the south edge of the columns that correspond to 
decreased compression strain (of similar magnitude) on the north edges followed by a reversal 
upon closure jacking. 
 
Figure 95. Graph. Strains measured in the interior column of pier 2 southbound. 

=== PDF PAGE 84 ===
76 
 
Figure 96. Graph. Strains measured in the exterior column of pier 2 southbound. 
Upon further review of these data with the structural engineer, the drastic reduction in strains 
which resulted in returning to the somewhat normal values was a result of the internal 
prestressing of the entire section. The ±75–100 e values shown in the columns were a direct 
result of a pier movement (away from midspan) of approximately 0.75 inches (19.05 mm) (from 
field observations). Subsequent prestressing must therefore have resulted in a permanent net 
movement (toward midspan) of a similar magnitude or approximately 0.75 inches (19.05 mm). 
All temporary DAS boxes were again removed to allow the construction of a public viewing 
platform beneath pier 2 (adjacent to the river). At the time of removal, it was thought that the 
permanent DAS would be installed within the week in a vault cast aside the northwest corner of 
the footing (pier 2 southbound). Ultimately, nearly 1 month of data were lost during this 
disconnection period. Furthermore, it was not clear at that time whether the substructure  
gauges would be online for the truck tests series scheduled for the following month. 
PHASE III—LONG-TERM HE ALTH MONITORING 
The third and final phase of SSHM for the St. Anthony Falls Bridge Monitoring Project was the 
long-term health monitoring of the substructure, which was synchronized with the superstructure 
system. In phase III, the loads induced on the entire bridge by the ongoing daily use of the bridge 
were monitored as well as those effects caused by diurnal and seasonal temperature variations. 
The timeline shown in figure 46 indicates that long-term monitoring should have commenced 
upon completion of the bridge which opened on September 18, 2008, more than 3 months  
early. However, no live load, diurnal, or seasonal data were available at the time of this report  
(6 months after the bridge opening), with the exception of several days of monitoring that 
included live load truck tests. 

=== PDF PAGE 85 ===
77 
The long-term monitoring program also included numerous superstructural instrumentation 
regimes involving deck corrosion, box girder vibrations, box girder strains, etc., which were 
outside the scope of the SSHM program. SSHM was incorporated into the overall health 
monitoring of the bridge via an onsite DAS building located east of the north end of the bridge. 
Therein, various systems were housed to monitor the various gauge types used throughout the 
bridge. For the SSHM components, two systems are presently being used that replaced the 
temporary DAS systems described previously. Both systems act as repeaters, whereby the data 
are collected and transmitted via Ethernet or similar communication to the far end of the bridge 
(over 1,000 ft (305 m)). 
Live Load Truck Tests 
Live load testing of the completed bridge using weighed trucks was conducted 4 days prior to the 
bridge opening. Although the intention was to have data collected from both the substructural 
and superstructural instrumentation by the permanent DAS, it became clear 2 days prior to the 
test that the substructure gauges would not be connected to any unit (temporary or permanent). 
To that end, FGE, LLC sent personnel to the I-35W bridge site the day before the testing to 
reconnect to the temporary DAS units, assuring this valuable information was not lost.  
Figure 97 shows the temporary DAS being reconnected to the southbound pier 2 footing. The 
vault in which the permanent repeater DAS units are to be housed is formed with plywood just 
behind the temporary DAS units shown. The units were reconfigured to record at higher rates  
(one sample/minute for resistive gauges and two samples/minute for the vibration wire gauges). 
The 2-min sampling rate for the vibrating wire gauges was the limiting (high-end) rate dictated 
by the number of gauges, the multiplexers, and the basic physics of the gauge type. The faster 
resistive gauges were recorded at a 1-min logging rate, but the DAS was sampling at 100 Hz. As 
before, logging of this device incorporated maximum, minimum, average, and instantaneous 
readings as accumulated over the 1-min logging interval.  

=== PDF PAGE 86 ===
78 
 
Figure 97. Photo. Temporary DAS system reconnected, reconfigured, and reattached in 
new location adjacent to the permanent DAS subpanel vault. 
Truck testing involved eight fully loaded dump trucks (50,000 lb (22,700 kg) each) driven in a 
series of patterns across the bridge. Starting with a side-by-side configuration (eight abreast), the 
trucks began at pier 3 (north side of the river) on the southbound structure and moved 
systematically across to the south, stopping at prescribed locations (e.g., pier 3, quarter points, 
midpoint, pier 2, etc.). Figure 98 shows one such truck configuration. 
 
Figure 98. Photo. Trucks (400-kip (181,436.95-kg) total load) staged at predetermined 
location. 

=== PDF PAGE 87 ===
79 
One of the many convenient features of the temporary DAS was the wireless/remote 
reconfiguration options that allowed onsite or in-office access to the system. While onsite  
during the afternoon before the truck test, both the vibrating wire and resistive gauge systems 
were reconfigured via cellular internet access to the host computer in Tampa, FL. Although  
the host was remotely accessed from the field, all data were being logged to the secure site on  
5-min intervals. 
The first series of truck tests were conducted over a 10-h period beginning at 7 p.m. on 
September 14, 2008, and concluding at 5 a.m. on September 15, 2008. Figure 99 shows the raw 
data as updated on the host Web site every 5 min. All strains were zeroed once the DAS units 
were reconnected, which represented live load measurements and showed minute changes in 
strain due to the truck loads. Figure 100 through figure 102 show a single load cycle for the 
columns, shaft 1, and shaft 2, respectively. Given the calibration and understanding of the  
column strain magnitudes afforded by the closure pour strains (±75–100 e  represented a  
0.75-inch (19.05-mm) top of column movement), it is clear that as the trucks approached mid-
span at approximately 8:30 p.m., the columns moved outward approximately 0.05–0.07 inches 
(1.27–1.78 mm). This was caused by a slight loss of camber from the centrally located 
concentrated load. The steps in the data were congruous to the times in which the trucks were 
either stopped at a given location (10–15-min holds) or moving to the next location. It can also 
be seen that multiple load cycles were conducted up until the time at which the contractor took 
over to complete other aspects of the bridge in the early morning hours of that day. This set of 
tests was denoted as the static truck tests due to the long holding periods. Figure 101 and  
figure 102 clearly show live load effects all the way down to the toe of each shaft.  

=== PDF PAGE 88 ===
80 
I-35W St. Anthony Falls Bridge Live Load Truck Tests
Remote Strain Data
Pier 2 Southbound Columns Int and Ext
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
9/14/08
 18:00
9/14/08 
19:1
2
9/14/
08
 20:24
9/14/08
 21:36
9/14/08 
22:48
9/15/08 0:009/15/
08
 1:12
9/15/
08
 2:2
4
9/15/08 3:369/1
5/08 4
:48
9/15/
08
 6:0
0
Note: Graph is updated every 5 minutes 
Strain (ue)
NE
(int)
NW
(int)
SE
(int)
SW
(int)
NE
(ext)
NW
(ext)
SE
(ext)
SW
(ext)
 
Figure 99. Graph. Column strains during 10-h truck tests (positive compression). 
